
06:20 sunrise 11.9h daylight 18:17 sunset |   v           m     M  sj      e |
06:21 sunrise 11.9h daylight 18:15 sunset |   v           m    M   sj      e |
06:22 sunrise 11.9h daylight 18:14 sunset |   v           m   M    sj      e |
06:23 sunrise 11.8h daylight 18:12 sunset |   v           m M      sj      e |
06:24 sunrise 11.8h daylight 18:11 sunset |   v           mM       sj      e |
06:24 sunrise 11.7h daylight 18:09 sunset |   v           M        sj      e |
06:25 sunrise 11.7h daylight 18:08 sunset |   v          Mm        sj      e |

“The best chance to get through the Coconino is on the south side of Manzanita
about halfway from the head of the canyon to Komo Point. One should get through
the Kaibab east or west of here. The Redwall break is a bit farther west. The
Redwall of the point between the forks is possible.”

“the ravine just east of Obi Point.” “We drove out E4 and followed the middle
branch when it split. On the way to Obi Canyon, a half hour of walking, we
crossed one deep ravine quite sheer where it reached the rim.  There was a
shallow, short ravine before we started down into Obi.  We had looked the land
over from the rim just after crossing the first one. Obi is a very exceptional
ravine in that it gets the walker through to the Hermit with no real climbing
problems. There are a couple of ledges in the Kaibab soon after the canyon
begins to get steep that call for good route finding, but…” “we could proceed
west along the Hermit to Deva Saddle.” “On the return we found that walking was
easier lower along the bench than the route we had used on the way west. When
we neared Obi, we climbed and came a bit closer to the base of the Coconino. I
noticed an overhang with smoke stains on the ceiling” “The rangers used the
west fork of E4 as their approach road and they parked on the rim of the right
canyon. This would be a faster and easier way to climb Deva than the one I
used, coming up from Bright Angel Creek from a little north of Ribbon Falls. I
am not sure that it would be the fastest approach to Brahma.”

“The way to them and along their bases was not too bad although there was some
brush to break through. On the return, I used a deer trail that is nearly
continuous along the north side of the closer tower. I saw that there is no
easy and safe way up either. I climbed up about 25 feet on the far side of
Tritle II, but for me to continue would have been suicide.”

“following a shallow, tree filled gully all the way towards the rim. There's
less brush on the slopes above the north side of the gully. After 0.25 miles
you'll hit the rim and be looking down directly over Kibbey. If you thought the
bushwacking was bad up until now, turn back, it gets much, much worse. Above
Kibbey, you can see a prominent fin of Coconino Sandstone. Drop down the
ridgeline aiming for the top of the Coconino formation below. The least brushy
way seemed to be the crest of the ridge, but there are times when you will
truly need to plow through thorns and cat claw. Just as you hit the Coconino,
drop off to the left (north) into a very steep and loose gully. The descent is
messy, using branches, roots and rock to lower you down through the
duff. Ideally, it is best to hug the Coconino once you get about 1/3 of the way
down, as there's a game trail that hugs the base once you're past some of the
steeper stuff. If you cut over too early, you'll end up cliffed out. I left a
cairn on my last visit on what I felt was a good place to start hugging the
Coconino if possible. After following the base of the Coconino for a few
hundred yards (too low= lots of locust brush) you'll emerge onto a small ridge
that drops onto the gloriously brush free Supai and really the only enjoyable
part of the day. Take the obvious line across the red rock up to the summit
base.”
